# WoSSS21 Abstracts

## Session 1
### [Sustaining software in cultural heritage](/wosss21-agenda#session-1)  
Coming soon

## Session 2
### [Applying the FAIR principles to software](/wosss21-agenda#session-2)  

#### Research software and beyond - ESMValTool: a community and FAIR software for evaluations of Earth system models
**by Fakhereh (Sarah) Alidoost**  
Let’s imagine: I want to analyze a time series of 50 years of air temperature in the past and in the future generated by 10 climate models and visualize the results. So, I developed some lines of code implementing the analysis. The code includes running several tasks: finding and downloading data, checking the data for completeness and correctness, processing the data, and finally storing the results. Also, it creates some plots that can be used for figures in my publications. It took me some time and effort to develop the code that performs the analysis in an efficient way concerning computational costs. You need to implement a similar analysis in your research, for example analyzing air temperature and precipitation simulated by 5 other different models. You can re-use my code instead of re-implementing it from scratch because it is FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable). This is the world where our research is efficient, and our code is sustained as it is usable by others for their own research.  

Generally speaking, the first step in using software is to find it. Then, we need to know how to access it. Finally, we can execute the software. However, implementing these steps is not straightforward since the research software is made to run a specific experiment in a scientific domain. Also, developing software can be a challenging task because as researchers, we might not have all the skills needed to write well-described and well-structured code during our research. Therefore, it is impossible to define one solution that fits everyone in all research disciplines. To facilitate this, research communities promote best practices and recommendations around elements related to software. These elements are mainly public repositories, version control systems, licenses, community registries, and software quality tools. As implementing FAIR principles changes the way we do science, guidelines on how to treat those elements are often tailored towards our own research field/community. It is also common that best practices of developing software cover other aspects of the research like data and papers.  

In my talk, I will introduce a community-driven software: Earth System Model Evaluation Tool (ESMValTool), see https://www.esmvaltool.org. I will also explain how this software makes it possible to reuse code easily and ensures transparency and reproducibility of research output. Here is a summary:  

The World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) provides a platform for international collaborations to better understand climate phenomena and develop useful climate information. The core projects of WCPR explore models that show how our climate system works, how it changes, and what impacts are. Climate and Earth system models are very complex codes that project future climate. Outputs of the models are used as the basis for climate research around the world. To analyze the output collectively, WCRP organizes and leads the activities in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) involving thousands of researchers. CMIP sets standards and experimental protocols and facilitates sharing codes and comparing models’ results. ESMValTool is a software that facilitates the assessments of Earth system models in CMIP. The software is built and maintained by a community of scientists and software engineers. The community includes technical and scientific teams that review contributions mainly in the form of codes in climate-related domains. Also, the community is supported by principal investigators and a user engagement team. Discussions, developments, maintenance and collaborations mostly take place in public on GitHub https://github.com/esmvalgroup. The software processes data and runs analyses efficiently regarding computational resources. It also stores provenance and citation information in a user-friendly way. Automated testing through unit tests and review processes safeguards the quality of research data, codes and publications. In addition, the software is a collection of publicly available scripts with extensive documentation. Moreover, there is an online tutorial that shows not only how to run an experiment but also how to develop your own scripts. In this way, ESMValTool helps others to understand our analyses, makes the results reproducible and facilitates collaborations.

## Session 3
### [New developments in preserving and sustaining research software](/wosss21-agenda#session-3)  

#### Reproducibility; Research Objects (RO-Crate) and Common Workflow Language (CWL)
**by Stian Soiland-Reyes**  
The use of digital methods and computational analysis is now ubiquitous across sciences and research disciplines. However, there is a growing concern that while modern computing accelerates scientific development and progress, it can come at the cost of reduced reproducibility and a difficulty of communicating the methodology to other researchers, particularly through traditional scholarly articles as text and static figures. [Research Objects](https://www.research.manchester.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/why-linked-data-is-not-enough-for-scientists(394d2487-5598-4e1e-a0c1-d67ad65d7947).html) have been proposed as a unit of scholarly communication, gathering raw data, software, results, figures and documents, described and inter-related using Linked Data, and as an aggregation cited by its own persistent identifier.

[RO-Crate](https://www.researchobject.org/ro-crate/) is a realization of Research Objects using off the shelf Web standards (JSON-LD) and vocabularies  (schema.org), with a developer-friendly lightweight approach and a set of best-practice guides for capturing “just enough” structured metadata, being interoperable with Linked Data technologies, and extensible for domain-specific needs.  RO-Crate is being developed as a community-led project, supported by open source tools, and is being adapted for a wide range of different scientific domains and use cases.


## Session 4
### [Sustaining the community and promoting (human) infrastructures for software sustainability](/wosss21-agenda#session-4)  
Coming soon
