# Preserving our collective documentary heritage in bits, putting a step forward
**by Otigbu Austine**  

## From session 1 - [Sustaining software in cultural heritage](/wosss21/agenda#session-1)  

The definitive write-up of this talk appears in the [WoSSS21 report](https://wosss.org/#reports).

### Resources
A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FMZBW2J43e0&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=5) and [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1hyj8ShW7o5_ZtNdX9Ialcyb2MvL1pOWC/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=102694285560691348264&rtpof=true&sd=true) are available.

### Transcript

I am Otigbu Austine. And I am an archivist at the National Archives of Nigeria, Ibadan my area of interest is automation and digital preservation. I'll be speaking to you about how we are preserving our nation's documentary heritage in bits, which is a step forward, although is a tiny step, but I believe it's a step in the right direction. On the importance of, cultural heritage, we nation by exploiting archives cannot be overemphasised archives inestimable on priceless heritage of the nation. This unique source of information resources from the history, our core memories of a nation if only preserved this historical documents of value can assist the nation to formulate some policy, make quick and accurate decision provide timely first hand facts and primary evidence to fast track legal processes support scholarly research and academics and overall health depend democracy, especially in developing countries such as us. 

Therefore, as the archival institution in Nigeria, the National Archives of Nigeria continues to make deliberate efforts to salvage and preserve these records of perpetual value for easy accessibility, using different preservation technique, and methods. Over the past six decades. Prior to COVID-19 pandemic, the National Archives of Nigeria do deploy traditional methods of records management and archives administration, which was essentially paper based in preserving and disseminating information material to each user, enter COVID-19 COVID-19 pandemic actually was a blessing in disguise for us, because it helps us to actually rethink our archiving methods and processes. Before COVID-19, all our reference services our finding is they are purely paper based, so we never we have never digitised or submitted any of our functions. So COVID-19 actually opened our eyes. And actually, because the National Archives was closed for almost five months, or six months, we couldn't attend to anybody. So he actually helped us to actually rethink our hiring methods, and actually helped us to embrace automation, and digital preservation. Actually, automation and self preservation will help us to actually make what's called archive of functions more sustainable, simplify efforts to succeed, save time, and processes of a <something>. This is a meeting of preserving our national documentary heritage to both local and foreign users. 

So how do we set this project? You know, I'm started having Getting Started rather, suddenly, in tax to come up with a workable framework to implement this project. My team and I adopted the digital preservation model management approach to ensure your reports an inclusive process of implementing the project. The digital preservation  management model is a three legged approach, which clearly are quite three main areas of work, that is technology organisation, resources for the successful implementation of the automation and digital preservation project. Also, the digital preservation management model helps to identify five stages organisation, five stages of organisational responses to the issue of automation and self preservation. The five stages are, it helps us to acknowledge that each step is actually is local, it's a local concern. So really, we have to approach it locally. Although it's also a global standard. We're not global standard watch with a best practice standard. Secondly, we have to act. You know, even with the small resources we had, we had to stop we have to start with just two computers, two scanners, automatic data capture machine scans, we have to start because really, we can no longer close the archives for further along. We have to consolidate and consolidate by actually fast transmitting the project into a programme although that has not been achieved, but we only wait to achieve it. Also, we have to institutionalise it. externalise it in the sense that the digital preservation unit was formally recognised before it just used to be a unit one dimensional kind of material. But again, it has been recognised, recognised formally been administrative. Yes. And you know, we are collaborating. What I'm doing is part of collaboration. We are bringing people to actually exchange ideas exchange knowledge on how to make the project better. operated The first, the first leg out of the three legs. Apparently technology is an integral part of automation and digital preservation. It good understanding of the tangible hardware and intangible software aspects of technology to be adopted will be crucial to the success of this exercise. Considering this cost resource for the National Archives of Nigeria, a greater consideration was given to open source open source software to ensure future sustainability of the project. Really, like I said earlier, we had National Archives of Nigeria actually, you know, because of the economic issues COVID my chatra brought to the nation archives of Nigeria actually was cash strapped so we actually need to look inward, so we actually give greater concentrations of open source software to make sure that the future of the project is sustainable, so money will not be an issue in the long run. So the software deployment was ATOM (Access to Memory 2.4 version) was considered suitable for the repository system. The common information storage and retrieval software package was specifically developed by articulators parcel archive for long term archiving. It was developed as an open source web application with an idea to enable standardised and controllable creation of different levels of description of archival collection holding sort of collections or you know relevant information about the fonts has. This software programme contains general rules will highlight descriptions regardless of the type provide school and patch through the following basic entity types of their interactions assets records at our institution authority records and archival institutions please visit must be able to link National Archives of Nigeria and our NGO for a better insight to work on so far. Also, software's PDF software's open source PDFs of us and then check the fixity software's are actually deployed for integrity check and official purposes. This second leg of the three legged approach are organised by level the management is committed to the success of the project to this day, the management is drafting a digital preservation policy framework to ensure legal and political contract compliance. Guys, I think at this juncture are often employed guys, if you have any probably draft copy of most will help us in in drafting our digital preservation policy, who would actually love it? All right, the resource the totalling the resource aspect of it, within this class capital resource on the National Archives of Nigeria, lead to equipment we have procured, like I've said earlier, the National Archives of Nigeria kindly procured those two computers to scanners, a server or outside device, you know, we understand that it's a local affair, you have to adjust from somebody. However, you know, alternative source of funding is needed to ensure continuity of this alternative source of funding is really, really needed was to go far in this project. 

So, conclusion the immediate cause immediate focus of this project is to digitise our quality of national documentary heritage for digital preservation for as long as necessary. The key focus is on endangered archives that may be lost forever if urgent actions are not taken to solving them. I mean the funding and human resource shortage crisis faced by the National Archives of Nigeria, over 1000 endangered archives have been digitised or waiting to be transferred to the digital repository for easy access by users. Lastly, ensure the library or friends of the institution for support, particularly in the equipment or financial support when necessary. The transition period, of course, is meant to last for up to four months already with support local international support really, probably may not last that much. Or maybe it can actually no get the lifespan of your project. Thank you very much. Questions, comments. We welcome thank you

