# Software Sustainability in the context of Software-based Art Conservation
**by Patricia Falcão**  

## From session 1 - [Sustaining software in cultural heritage](/wosss21/agenda#session-1)  

he definitive write-up of this talk appears in the [WoSSS21 report](https://wosss.org/#reports).

### Resources

A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2sY8-Xg5sMI&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=6) of the talk is available.

### Transcript

My name is Patricia Falcao, and I'm a doctoral researcher at Goldsmiths. And looking at how artists and the gaming industry, what are what they are doing to preserve their artworks. And this came from my role as a conservator at tate for the last 12 years, where I was very aware that we have a tiny collection of 15 artworks. And so, and I know that most any Contemporary Art Museum has very small numbers of these types of artworks in their collections at the moment. But the work still survive. And most of that is happening because of artists themselves caring for their artworks. And so I was curious about that. So that's where my research comes from. And that's sort of my background is literally as a conservator working in a collecting institution, with artists to collect that. Collected artworks, and that means caring for them for the long term. So the reason my presentation does not reflect the title that I used here is, when I started trying to compare what software sustainability in how it related to software based art conservation, I kept going back to research software. And clearly there's lots of commonalities and lots of things that apply to either. There's some very key differences. But at some point, I was like, Okay, I'm making so many assumptions about research software that I know nothing about. So my my question for you all, is, I'll just present what I do, and how we think about sustainability, or preservation, which is the term that we use. So it's a slightly different meaning, but not that far off. And just if it resonates with any of you, I would love to hear about that, because that's something that I've been wanting to learn more about, I think there's a lot to learn from how you are addressing research software in the software Sustainability Institute and the community. So I would love to hear about that. So let's, let's stop this, and I'll show you, I'll start by showing you a couple of artworks, just so you understand what I'm what I'm talking about. So this is the earliest piece in the collection. And it's from 2003. It's by the artist Michael Craig Martin. And it's a director executable, so it runs on Mac OSX, it Sorry, no, Windows XP. And it's this little screen, it's a little bit bigger than A4, and is meant to hang on the wall as a painting. So the size of the monitor is really important. The frame of the monitor is really important. And then what you see are the drawings that are sort of key to Michael's Michael Craig Martin's practice, and they just appear and disappear. And you need to be understand the context that is this is 2003. And not so nowadays, technically, really not that impressive, but it does represent this point in time. Now, that's not meant to do just change to the next one. So this is the simplest piece we have. And I'm going to show you the most complex that we acquired a couple of years back. So this is the other piece, this is the most complex piece we have. And just to give you a sense of what we're talking about here is besides the sculptural element of the puppet, and the whole structure that holds the puppet is also part of the work. There's all these software systems that come together. So that there is this stable choreography of how the puppet moves, and the eyes of the puppet follow people in the space so you need to know when to move the puppet using the automation system are helping to puppet with the automation system. There's some tracking of the visitors there's the tracking of the location of the head so you can point the eyes and then there's one central system that manages all of this. 

So when I first saw this work, I was like, Oh my god, I'm not. I don't know how to go about it. And then you know, as you start doing it, it just sort of becomes a bit simple. This is a type of works and now these works are being collected by the state. NTT is a national institution in the UK, and has some very clear, and it's a very clear mission, which is to care for preserve are the key points here for works of art. So therefore, I'm collecting, we are collecting works of art and the software sort of falls under the work of art rather than being the core. And these works need to be exhibited to the public. And they need to be available for study and research. The fact that these needs to be exhibited to the public means that we need to accept a degree of change, you know, if for nothing else, because the monitor will fail after a period of time, and, or, you know, monitor, a computer will fail, that piece of equipment will eventually fail. So we always need to plan we plan for that. And this creates this need for change creates a little bit of attention with the need for study or research because it means that these are software systems that we need to change. But we also want to know what they were initially. So if a work is created with director, we want to know that even if eventually we need to change it to something else. That's what it means for an artwork to be displayed in perpetuity. I mean, I, I always cringe when I hear perpetuity in this context, because I wouldn't, you know, the investment to do that is scary. But that's alright. And so the way we do that is sort of trying to understand what an artwork is in all its context. So and that usually means bringing together factors such as, you know, what computer is being the hardware, and mostly the computers that are being used, very important are all the peripherals because they can be really unusual. But there's also a lot of information that you need to know about the display space, how something is being shown in the galleries. And then it's, it's just another one almost, I mean, it's more than just another one. But it's another of those element elements is the software, or the media or the data which whatever you need for an artwork to be run. And all of that is subordinate to some conceptual elements. So one example here is, for some works, a computer, maybe just something that is hidden behind the wall, and some works, this computer is right at the centre of an artwork, and it can be changed. So the value of these different elements will vary greatly from work to work. And it's only dependent on mostly dependent on what an artist thinks about that. So I went for the simple work just because the other ones would take me 10 minutes just to list everything. And in this case, what we received from the artist was a computer that is built into the monitor. It had the director executable installed. And then we worked with the artists and the developer who worked with us as artists to receive the lingo code that was used for the project. And then we also received some software to assess the speed of the phase because even in in 2003 we do when the work was acquired, we already knew that there were issues with the processors, accelerating how things happened. And so the developer kindly built a piece of software so that we could measure that. And this is a pretty default acquisition. So we usually have a piece of software that is in a computer ready to be run in the gallery rather than having to build the systems ourselves. Of course, we don't create the software at all by the time we receive something it's usually seen as done. And our input into how it's built is very small. If anything, I may ask for something extra that might make something more sustainable. For instance, if we are being provided with an executable file or an application, I can ask to receive an application for Windows and for Linux for instance, rather than just having one or actually for Mac and Windows rather than just having one for Mac that makes things much more complicated. So but there's it's very limited by the time we see it, the software is what it is.

Also, there's a very limited number of instances these works coming to the collections they're either unique, or you may have like editions of up to five, but not more than that. The code is completely custom or sorry, not completely. It's there's always a custom element to it. Sometimes it's not, it's a lot of commercial code and customised in some way. The code may be written by the artist themselves, but some words some work with one collaborator and have long term relationships with, with a collaborator in some, in some artists work with whole production teams, or with external suppliers themselves. And the other aspects here is that peripherals are often non standard, I mean, doesn't get much more non standard than a puppet being thrown around in the gallery. But in the end, you know, they all depend on the small number of connectors and interfaces, so it's not so bad. So the way we deal with this is any work that comes into the collection is thoroughly analysed and documented. So we need to understand exactly what the system is. We also recommend that there's a thorough analysis of the source code whenever possible. At Tate, we don't do this very often, unless it's really necessary. We have very little experience of that. But Professor Dina Hengel, at the New York University, for instance, has published a lot on that. And we also do a risk assessment about for the long term preservation of each artwork, which flags things that we know we can do now to prevent to make intervention later on easier besides digital storage, and the classical things that you do for digital objects. So again, there is always a thorough documentation of all the different aspects that do work and not just the software. And then we create preservation elements at the point of acquisition. So the first time we encounter work that look, this is how the documentation looks like. So we think about the production history, technical specifications. One unusual thing is actually the user experience and the function of the work or the functionality of the work itself

