# The Role of Fiscal Sponsorship in Open Software
**by Andy R. Terrel**  

## From session 2 - [Open Science & applying the FAIR principles to software](/wosss21/agenda#session-2)  

The definitive write-up of this talk appears in the [WoSSS21 report](https://wosss.org/#reports).

### Resources

A [video]( https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7E72Mi6Z2Tc&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=14) and [slides](https://github.com/aterrel/fiscal-sponsorship-talk/blob/master/fiscal-sponsorship.ipynb) are available.

### Transcript 

Thanks, everyone, for coming. I'm here to talk a little bit about the role of fiscal sponsorship and open source software. My name is Andy Terrell, I was formerly the president of NumFOCUS up to the last few months ago when I've kind of transitioned out of that role. And this talk will kind of sitting around some of the work gnome focus has done, but also like a broader community of like, why it exists, and so forth. Here, so first off, I like to just kind of state that fiscal sponsorship is a thing that is been rising. You know, the software, open source software is very different from the 1980s when it started, and we kind of like sit back and say, Well, how are we supporting it and a fiscal sponsorship is one way that you support the ecosystem around the community that is building the software, and just say, here's a very small list. I mean, I think that when I kind of put together a report on this, I found like, well over 50 foundations that have come and as you can see, there's a lot of different pieces to it. And we'll discuss a little bit about why there's so many pieces and so many things, after I kind of established what these things are and what they do. So I think why do we need fiscal sponsorships? 

First and foremost, software teams has grown in size and complexity. When I was contributor at ScyPy or the SimPy organisation, over 15 years ago, we had over 150 contributors. Now you look at something like Jupyter, and they have, you know, probably in the order of 50 codes with each having dozens of people interacting with them. And so we've seen this kind of explosion in open source software, contributors, and maintainers, and so forth. 

Second, like we're crossing more borders, used to be, you know, like, Berkeley database was made one university in one lab, and GNU came out of MIT with one lab. But that's not how software works anymore, like university boundaries don't make sense anymore. Sharing those costs, it becomes very difficult and legal borders really kind of get in the way. Sometimes I can't tell you the number of times I've tried to get money to a contributor in a sensitive country, or by the US standards such as Iran or other places. And like, yeah, it's it's, you end up hitting legal border very quickly. And this has created an undue burden on our current structures, they just don't exist in this ecosystem of supporting this broad global community producing things like software. So up comes a fiscal sponsorship. And let's before we dive into all the detail of fiscal structures, let's establish why we need legal entities for software. And that's the idea that every software programme and easily allegedly, but once it gets to that, get to a size, what do they establish? At the end of the, it's very simple, you need some legal rights and obligations with an individual company or an organisation and you need some way to establish that. 

Usually, when I sit down projects ask very, very few questions. This is who's responsible your assets and liabilities? And the first question is like, well, I just write code, why do I have assets and liabilities? Secondly, you know, who's speaking on behalf of your project? And if not, who, which if you don't have someone speaking on behalf of your project, how can I have an organisation partner with you? How do we get work together to make decisions and so forth, in hopefully in a fair and transparent way? And then, you know, what happens if you find out, you know, processes of your organisation do not conform to legal standards, I think it's happened more than once, where the officers community has crossed boundaries that the legal structures disagree with. One example was very close to my heart when I was working, I've worked in Wall Street for a little bit in my life, and here's an example of surrogate Lexi, who was at Goldman Sachs and contribute to open source software and then found himself at the centre of an FBI investigation because he was contributing code that there were bug fixes inside Goldman Sachs while he was working at Goldman Sachs time. And so there became a civil case that turned into a very real problem for a open source contributor. 

Alright, so hopefully, we established that there is some legal entity there, but like, what is it? What do you need to become one? Well, let's, let's start a little bit like stepping out of the software world a bit and think about something we've all wanted to do, whether we've been successful or not, and that's start a band. So if you're going to start a band, like the first kind of thing you do is just you actually have a pre launch you decide I'm going to start a band you start writing some songs, you practice your favourite instrument, but Really, at this point, you're an individual, your music career stops here, it's a bummer. But you know, there's not really a lot going on, you own some copyright, but you know, does that matter if it's something nobody gets to hear about it, things like that. So your liabilities are just like your personal debt for instruments and your assets or some copyrights. And you're still very small, right? So come along and get your first gig. And now you have a shot at playing in front of people, having people understand what you do, and you're sharing your work. You keep on doing this, you know, you keep on doing it on your own turns into a recurring event. And, you know, maybe the covers weren't exactly licenced, but nobody cares me maybe you're using some some pieces of music or other things that you know, just fill in the bits of the gig that didn't work very well. You don't have enough content and so forth. Ah, you just a kid making a start, you still very small. But at the same time, now, I've asked that this is my accounts receivable, I get a paycheck from that, those gigs and it but I do have to make these weekly performances and so forth. Now you bring on a team, right? So now we're expanding our revenue. We're trying to find more people to fill out the show and get more songs together and make a bigger system out of that. Now you have a very real problem of sharing copyrights, and how is that going to work? And you have to kind of figure that out, like, how many times do we know bands like erupted because their copyright problems kind of overcame them. All right, now you start to notice all this debt you're getting because now you've got a band, you've got traveler's business, you have all sorts of all sorts of issues that kind of come with just communication between those teams and so forth. So you decide to Hey, we got started splitting up some of these liabilities, and some sales assets. So now we are no longer a solo person, we formed the entity of the band. And we now have a liability of a salary and dividend to the people boards or dividend however you want to put to the people who are working with, alright, along comes an imposter to your to your band start playing covers, and and all of a sudden, when you were playing other people's covers back in the Sella days, it didn't matter as much. But now these people are like taking your name, and you're a little bit upset about it. Well, you run to an attorney say, Well, you know, it's really hard to litigate, if you have very scant evidence, there's your name being associated with those songs say, Well, my harddrive has a date on it. But those things can be faked. And they have not as much weight and in court as you might want. So your attorney helps you understand like IP laws and across the different world, different legal zones or whatnot, your copyright trademark help protect your work. So now we have registered trademarks, and registered copyrights. And so now our assets have a little bit more legal weight to them. And they can be protected in court, if you will. So now you sign a big contract, one of your shows an agent wants to work for you, and you already have an entity. So it's very quick to sign that contract. And you already have people to work with, hopefully the headliner the band, and so you can get some royalties and profits from your concerts. So now I have both the band and the recording company working together, we've traded a licence to our work for royalty fees, we have concert rights, and we you know, and we but we do have some expenses. And we were able to get a lot more money from concerts and so forth. This point, you realise this is a lot of work, managing all the legal parts, all the assets, and even knowing who to talk to sometimes. So you want to keep this up? Or, you know, or do you just quit your day job yet? How do I how do I figure all these things out. So we bring out an administrator who helps us with all the sorts of planning, the budgeting, the helping sorts of things of that's not making your music so that you can focus back on making your music. Okay, so now we have an administration overhead. But we do have an asset, which is our business plan, which in some places is a copyrightable work. So going forward. So the start the administrators teaching and tweeting, which is good, you get more sponsors, they get endorsed and get more practice after the band. So now you have public major media relations, may we've all had some experiences on Twitter, those things have to be managed and understood as well in a very controlled way sometimes, especially when you're talking about an entire entity. 

Alright, so finally, you want to run your own event you print the numbers and figure out you can do it yourself. Turns out to be a lot more complicated. I think this is something we've definitely found in this open source world like events are great at bringing people of like mind together but the administration of these things and so the Minister he sets up what we call a professional employment organisation so we can hire people the world or wherever we want and handle insurance and helping people get through the things they need in their professional role. So you keep rocking and let the business roll. And now we have Event Management. So you look at all these things going on. 

So you look at this and what's the difference between software and the band effectively we have, you know, instead of registered copyrights, we do have copyrights, we often don't register them. We don't maybe have weekly performance, we do have maintenance. Most software developers are paid something. So there are salaries to understand open software, we say we, we don't need the licence fees, because we want to be fair giveaway. But everything else in this plan should exist in software is as well. And for open source. So managing all these things are like the place where Fiscal Sponsorship kind of comes in and helps you arrange and manage these projects without the personal. So Fiscal Sponsorship was an arrangement, but you can go to the National Council of Nonprofits and arrangement to attack attract donors, but also work within the IRS of for a US Code. In some places, it's more of like just a charity. But the idea being like we can create an entity out of this organisation and give it a fiscal thing, I'm running out of time but further but at the end of the day, we talk about the benefits of these organisations in helping organisational health promoting project governance, fiscal services, controlling your money, helping you with legal services and whatnot and advocating on your behalf in the broader community, such as courts, in briefs and so forth, with with that, I'll just invite you to come check us out at Num FOCUS and kind of meet our team and see you can see more of what we do.

