# Developing the ELIXIR Software Management Plan for Life Sciences
**by Fotis Psomopoulos on behalf of the ELIXIR Software Best Practices working group**  

## From session 2 - [Open Science & applying the FAIR principles to software](/wosss21/agenda#session-2)  

The definitive write-up of this talk appears in the [WoSSS21 report](https://wosss.org/#reports).

### Resources

A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MarBxlpdTjk&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=13) is available.

### Transcript

The purpose is to talk about the efforts that ELIXIR has been doing around software management plan, software management plans in general. And just to provide a one slide context of what ELIXIR is, for those who are maybe not aware, elixir is the Pan European infrastructure for life science data. It's coordinated by ELIXIR hub which is located in Cambridge, in the UK, and essentially tries to connect and call into various different services around Life Sciences across Europe, with institutions, taking parts and exchanging of knowledge, technology and tech, the capacity and having a clear mind about fairness in life science data. And one of the main efforts that is one of the efforts of the main one, but one of the efforts have been taken place under ELIXIR, especially under the tools platform, is about the software best practices. So the main idea here of this task, force is to identify what are the best practices, the main ideas that we could put forward for software development, so that we can improve the quality standard with the appraisal software internal. And this means talking about what are the different standards, how to measure them, and so forth. One of the main outcomes of this of this effort, and is a software management plan. And although there are a few software management plans out there already, and what we try to achieve here is to define something of a unified approach that is low barrier entry for people who might not be as competent in software development, but they need to be aware of how this can be actually being supported. Essentially very similar to a data management plan, a software management plan is an awareness tool, it essentially tries to guide people to think in advance about how the software is going to be working, what are the key element of the software itself, who is going to be dealing in which part of that and essentially act take the role of the guide, and for everyone involved in the project itself, the design principles that we had in putting together the SMP, and were some basic guidelines if you like. So the first one is that like this be focused on life sciences. And this was a design principle. But ultimately, I have to admit that the that the outcome could be quite very applicable and sort of started in life science but is much more broadly applied. And the second point is to have a minimal set of questions not to be too expansive, not to be too detailed. So someone would be able to feel the major part the key elements of the of the software itself, without getting into them into technical details that they may not be fully aware of at the time. Also, we need to be applicable to a wide range of projects from a simple one script thing that a PhD student maybe take doing in a context of a study up until a full suite full platform tools that are interconnected across modules. The other part is that this is by design to connect those different principles. And I will still come back to those near the end of this talk. And ultimately, in order to achieve something that is widely accepted, we try to do this by community review. So essentially, we reached out to the various groups of different initiatives within ELIXIR and tried to get feedback on what actually works, what is needed and how this could be mostly of use eventually. If we look at who is actually going to be using SMP, we essentially look at different stakeholders like so the first one is the actual person in charge of submitting the proposals. And because this person again, in the concept of DMP, like needs to be aware of what is the software development? What are the best management practices that need to be taking place, and so forth? Well, that's how you have a project manager. And that will be monitoring this whole process and needs to be checking the development itself. And questions like is there a licence for this software? Is it available online and so forth are questions according to that cycle. And then you have the software engineer, the coding researcher who is using SMPs as a tracker, if you might, monitoring the process itself. As you can see,

every stakeholder has a complete different set of skills, competencies and expertise that they can fill in. So the smp by definition should not be too technical. So I'm going to go through the actual sections quite fast, mostly to give you an overview, what it's about. And we plan to have this as a white paper out in the next couple of weeks. So Hopefully this will be more open for people to check. And essentially, we're talking about accessibility, the compilation testing interoperability version in the reproducibility and recognition as different sections of the SMP. And looking for example, licence the questions could be this can be accessed by third parties. If there's a licence, what is the licence? Talking about documentation? Where is the documentation located? What's the purpose of the software? And if it's located in the documentation itself? And also what are the different functions that documentation is actually listing in there so that you can look it up? In terms of testing? What are the different types of testing available, varying sample data and parameters allowed to use the software and to test it out? And interoperability what are the standards and here we are trying to connect also with the existing registries, and are used and for example, for sharing was one of the options here that can be used to highlight standardised input and output formats versioning. Version Control is one of the key elements that we need to keep in this SMP. So questions could be, what are the different measurement systems that are available that are you using and fully aware that some of the control systems here can be a bit indicative of when people started to actually work? version from systems? And what types of additional version and keep in mind? And finally, if you look at reproducibility and permission, how can you ensure that the environment of the software is capture effectively, and if you can provide input of examples for so that the actual function of yourself can reproduce? How can you get reports on bugs and really problems back from the community, and ultimately, how to ensure that the community can recognise the role of the project of the software to the rest of the world. So persistent identifiers, citation information and connection to registries. So these are the particular sections in the SMP and as you can hopefully realise, from this reading brief overview, they tried to catch a very high level but critical components of the of the software cycle. This is sort of the SMP and I won't highlight that we are looking at the lifecycle from the design up until if you like the first release, or a major use of software, so he's not looking at the system a big part of it, which I know it sounds a bit compromising, especially in the context of this particular workshop. And however, the idea is to move beyond this, these questions and start to connect to different measurements that can be assessing the indicators of the software itself, and here is where we are trying to connect with the metrics around fairness, like this is never that been done primarily by open events and software observatory, led by BSc in Barcelona supercomputing centre, again, with ELIXIR. And in this conduct, you can see different principles of fairness and how they can be connected to different outcomes that can be achieved by metadata of the software. And the key connection between the SMP and this one is that as you can imagine, from the questions, and from the principles, there is a quite clear connection between those two. So we can read and identify the metrics of connected principles, we can essentially connect this to the SMP and therefore can have indicators associated to that. In that sense, the open events provides some technical monitoring of metrics, tools, and tools in general. And this can be done also by benchmarking benchmarking with individual tools. This is the open events, or by whole population of tools, which is the tools observatory. And here's essentially the way that those two things are being connected. With a quality assessment being done by using software management plan for example, and community the discussion across different communities that actually do that, at the infrastructure level, technical, and define what are the different tools that are can be used for that.

And the last slide, and I want to close with that being fully aware of the time, and is that this is essentially our first major outcome, the road has been longest, we started working on pads in November in 19. And right now, we are close to a first version of that. So we are a few in a few months behind of our original road map. However, the idea is that by the next couple of years, we will be connecting this SMP to the automatic metrics of the open events and the software observatory. So ultimately, we can have a semi automated interface for both the creation and data capturing of SMPs available to the wider community. And with that, I'd like to thank you and questions I'm more than welcome to address.

