# Research software and beyond - ESMValTool: a community and FAIR software for evaluations of Earth system models
**by Fakhereh (Sarah) Alidoost**  

## From session 2 - [Open Science & applying the FAIR principles to software](/wosss21/agenda#session-2)  

The definitive write-up of this talk appears in the [WoSSS21 report](https://wosss.org/#reports).

### Resources
A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UXt7JADfvoA&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=12) is available.

### Transcript

Hi, everyone. I'm Sarah Alidoost. I'm a research software engineer working at the Netherlands eScience centre. The title of my presentation is research software and beyond ESMValTool a community driven and fair software for evaluation of earth system models. In this presentation, I will discuss why it is a good idea to have a community driven and fair software in climate science. And as an example, I will introduce earth system model evaluation tool. And then I will explain how these tools makes it possible to reuse the code easily. And it ensures transparency and reproducibility of research output. Also, as you can see in this slide, there's all references that are used in my presentation. Let's begin with some user stories. This is Jane. She's a researcher in climate science. And as you can see, in this figure in climate, we have different variables like air temperature, precipitation, wind, cloud, and so on. She wants to analyse a time series of 50 years of air temperature in the past and in the future generated by 10 climate models. So she has to start developing a code and her code should run similar tasks like finding and downloading data, checking data for correctness and completeness, processing data, storing the results, and finally creating some plots that she can use for figures in her publication. Also, she wants to make the code fair, and she knows that the code is sustained as it is usable by others for their own research. However, it takes some time and effort  from her to develop a code that runs the analysis in an efficient way. And she has a time limit in her research. And also applying FAIR principles is not as straight forward since her code, which is research software is made to run a time series analysis in climate science. So this is specific experiments in a scientific domain. And therefore guidelines on how to do these steps should be tailored to our own research field or community.

This is another story this is Ben is also a researcher in climate science, he wants to analyse air temperature and precipitation simulated by five other different models. Very similar to Jane story. However, developing code is a challenging task for him. Because as a researcher, he does not have all the skills needed to write a well described and well the structure code during his research. To address these challenges, a community driven and fair software can help. Here is an example ESMval tool or earth system model evaluation tool, which is a community driven software. Let's see what ESMval tool is. ESMVal tool is a software that facilitates the analysis of air system models. It is built and maintained by an international community of scientists and software engineers, and involves around 17 projects 60 institution and 200 developers. The community includes scientific and technical teams that reuse the code, and contributions. Let's see what ESMVal tool can do for us and how it makes it possible to reuse the code easily and it ensures transparency and reproducibility of research output. Not only the development and maintenance of the software, but also discussion and collaboration mostly takes place in public. For example, in GitHub, if you follow this link, you see the main page of the software as shown in this figure. There you can find more information about the repositories people themes, and also reporting issues. For example, announcing workshops and monthly meetings or in public. The software stores provenance and citation information in a user friendly way. In this way it shows transparency of research output, it also supports several programming languages and operating system. It process data. Data is your input and output in an efficient way regarding computational resources in this figure shows the architecture of the software

automated testing through unit tests and Review Process safeguard the quality of code, data and publications. So in this way, developing code covers other aspects of research that are data and publications. And regarding the automated testing and review process, they use the available tools on GitHub, like as shown in this bigger data workflows, or pull request reviews. The software is a collection of scrapes with extensive documentation. And here this is a link to the documentation. Documentation covers all aspects of research, for example, how software works, how to obtain and process data, how to cite the results, or the output of the analysis, and even what are the best practices in developing the code. Moreover, there is an online tutorial that shows not only how to run an experiment, but also how to develop your own scripts. So remember, our user stories using ESMval tool others can understand Jane's analysis, Ben can reuse code instead of reimplemented it from scratch, and they spend less time on developing code. Thank you.

