# FAIR adoption
**by Tom Honeyman**  

## From session 2 - [Open Science & applying the FAIR principles to software](/wosss21/agenda#session-2)  

The definitive write-up of this talk appears in the [WoSSS21 report](https://wosss.org/#reports).

### Resources

A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wUICMb4lk_M&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=9) of this talk and [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1vXU8fAOJ87tHYU4bqmm0pjGZ0P4WL8-eREDktdUENVI/edit?usp=sharing) are available.


### Transcript

My name is Tom Honeyman. I'm the software programme manager at the ARDC. And today I'll be talking about the plans for adoption of the FAIR for research software principles by the ARDC. The ARDC is a transformational initiatives that enables Australian research community and industry access to nationally significant leading edge data intensive infrastructure platforms, skills and collections of high quality data. We are a national digital research infrastructure facility, operating under the National collaborative research infrastructure strategy or increase scheme. We conduct our activities under a number of themes grouped into portfolios, and these are data and services platforms and software storage and compute, and people and policy. Increasingly, we are turning to projects that capture larger cross theme functionality. We're calling them somatic research data comments. We have initial projects in humanities and social sciences, and what we call a translational data challenge around bushfire so that's just give you a sense of the kind of organisation I'm joining from. So there is one thing however, the cross cuts all of our activities, and that is FAIR. And so in looking to adopt a set of principles that are more closely aligned with the with application to software outputs, the FAIR for RS principles are pretty natural fit for us. We've been puzzling for some time over how we might apply the fair principles to research software, and are only too happy to align ourselves with community efforts to define them. I'm going to jump across the bubbles a bit to talk about the various ways that the FAIR for RS principles will either be adopted advocated for or otherwise socialised in Australia with action by the ARDC. Speaking of direct adoption, we don't currently develop a lot of research software within the ARDC. But we feel that in adopting the FAIR for RS principles, it is important to show that we are in fact going to the effort of making our own software FAIR. So To this end, we'll be properly publishing our in house software relating to our international Geo sample number or idsn minting service, to show to our partners that it can be done that we're not just asking others to do so. The software team in the ARDC, myself and our software project coordinator, Paula Andrea Martinez, so I can see she in the call today will be conducting sessions for ardc staff, especially the broad array of external facing roles in the ardc. To help them understand and interpret the fair for Rs principles. We have a large number of staff who regularly communicate the fair principles as they relate to data, and especially metadata in the form of consultancies. We have a large number of communities that we facilitate across our various themes within which there are people who create research software. So getting our own staff on board with the FAIR for RS principles is an important first step. Finally, we have policy that sets expectations about outputs from our co investment programmes, we will be looking to update the existing policy to reference the fair for RS principles, as specifically relevant when considering software outputs from New co investments. We can't retrospectively place conditions on our existing co investment projects. We will however, encourage and assist where there is interest in doing so. underpinning a lot of our adoption will be the development of materials to communicate the principles outwards, and how to apply them in different contexts. We have already developed some complimentary materials around software publishing, and navigating software licencing. We also reference a lot of materials produced by organisations present in this workshop, but we need to go much further. The FAIR data self assessment tool was a valuable tool of engagement with a broad range of stakeholders for the ARDC, not just data owners, but managers, policymakers, support staff, amongst others. We want to produce a complimentary tool to target these stakeholders so that they can better understand what is being asked of software owners or developers, we feel that this is a change that must be visible not just to software authors, but also to the people around them, who perhaps do not understand the ins and outs of software development and publishing.

We'll also be running webinars on the principles targeting specific communities facilitated by the ardc and also the broader community. We'll produce some general guidance on our website which is very commonly adopted by partner research institutions in Australia pretty much verbatim, leading to consistent messaging nationally. Our platforms programme is fairly obviously connected to our adoption of the fair for RS principles. We define a platform as a set of online services, often with associated integration and or orchestration functions and connections to specific data resources that enable researchers to collect or generate data, analyse those data and produce outputs that can be made fair. Today, we've invested 21.7 million Australian dollars in 26 platforms, projects covering the breadth of our national science and research priorities, and national research infrastructure roadmap focus areas, we don't see the platform's themselves as targets of the fair for RS principles directly. You can see that within them, there are components that might be targets for making fair or that they create environments for software authors, and so expose an environment for encouraging fair for RS adoption by users or contributors. The platforms themselves are gateways through which we can reach specific national research communities, the users of these platforms, we do not. We do this through the facilitation of a community of platforms developers, once the fair for RS principles are formally published, we'll be targeting this community with webinars and assistance to adopt or further spread the principles. Some of these platforms are environments in which tools developers can develop custom workflow components to be used within the platform. ardc core investments are currently required to make data outputs fair. And in adopting the fair for Rs principles, we'll be encouraging the platforms to add guidance to drive adoption of the fair for RS principles, by the tools developers operating within the communities they laid. Some of these platforms incorporate or looking to incorporate Jupyter hub, creating an environment for software authorship, we are looking at ways that appropriately placed guidance or functionality might encourage users of these platforms that are writing code in the form of computational notebooks to consider making these outputs fair. In some cases, the platform's developers have said they may be interested in applying the fair principles to their outputs. This community of platforms developers will be looking, we'll be looking to work through a set of fair principles for platforms in the coming year or two, particularly through an RDA group hopefully, and this will likely reference the fair for RS principles within. But amongst the 26, there are one or two platforms that may be suitable to adopt the principles directly. And so we're investigating whether we can help them to do so and thus produce an exemplar amongst those platforms. One of our themes is in policy adoption, specifically related to data. We've been doing this for a great many years, especially through the work of one of our predecessor organisations from which we were formed the Australian National Data Service or ANDS since the release of the fair principles, and prior to that, in messaging, what we call the four transformations, we've been lobbying and making policy submissions to government research and industry forums and organisations pushing for the value of data for many years. The recently revised scope of the OECD recommendation concerning access to research data from public funding, to which Australia is a signatory expands now to include research software outputs. This is our current primary reference document for policy work for our advocacy work rather. And our key messaging will be to pursue the uptake of fair data fair software and open access. within the software programme at the ARDC, we're working towards gathering the raw data to make the case for fair software. We have impact stories, metrics and other materials for data. But an early focus for the software programme within the ARDC is to build out the national evidence for pursuing fair research software. Without this evidential base, it will be quite hard to make the case on the policy front. I will be talking more about how we intend to achieve this in session for tomorrow morning. And with that. Thank you very much.

