# An Introduction to the UK Reproducibility Network
**by Andrew Stewart**  

## From session 3 - [Human factors and new development in preserving and sustaining research software](/wosss21/agenda#session-3)  

### Resources 

A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qKmpUI0cgaw&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=21) and [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ZWu0RUlzTWGK2RygtWxvM53lLSdhmf01MVOiD7wQAUg/edit) are available.

### Summary

In this talk, I will provide a brief history and overview of the structure of the UK Reproducibility Network (UKRN). I will cover the goals of UKRN’s recently funded Research England Development Fund bid, the activities that this funding will support over the next 5 years, and some of the challenges that UK institutions face in transitioning to a more open and transparent way of conducting research.

The UK Reproducibility Network (UKRN) was launched in March 2019 by Marcus Munafò (University of Bristol), with activities coordinated by [the Steering Group](https://www.ukrn.org/steering-group/) and an [Advisory Board](https://www.ukrn.org/advisory-board/). At its inception, the UKRN brought together a number of individuals and pre-existing groups who had become increasingly focused on issues related to reproducibility, replicability, and transparency in research. Many of the early interactions took place via social media and revealed the extent to which there were overlapping concerns across disciplines and institutions around openness in research.

The creation of the UKRN provided a way to bring together those individuals and groups to work together towards solutions and advocate for cultural change. The main grassroots activities of the UKRN occur via the local networks, local network leads, and institutional representatives. Each local network (of which there are currently 63), many of which are ECR-led, engage in grassroots activities, such as forming Open Research Working Groups, that cross traditional discipline boundaries and act to promote the aims of the UKRN at their home institution. These activities can include setting up [ReproducibiliTea journal clubs](https://reproducibilitea.org/), [RIOT Science Clubs](http://riotscience.co.uk), organising regional or national workshops and conferences on transparency and reproducibility in research, organising local training events, and lobbying senior leaders to raise awareness and promote the importance of openness and transparency in research. The UKRN’s aims overlap substantially with the aims of the organisations (such as UKRI – including Research England and numerous individual research councils, Wellcome, the Software Sustainability Institute, and Jisc) that form the [External Stakeholder Group](https://www.ukrn.org/stakeholders/).

In August, Research England confirmed funding for the UKRN project “Growing and Embedding Open Research in Institutional Practice and Culture” over 5 years, beginning on September 1st 2021. This is a substantial and ambitious project with the overall aim of accelerating the uptake of high-quality open research practices across the 18 institutional members of the UKRN, and ultimately across the sector. There are three main workstreams to the project. The first involves working with academic communities to identify training gaps needed for transparent research practices, the (iterative) development of new training materials to meet the needs of these communities, a series of train-the-trainer events, and the curation of pre-existing and new training materials so that they are freely available to all (and not just to those institutional members of the UKRN). The second workstream involves developing and delivering a framework for the evaluation of institutional practice and learning in open research. Together these first two workstreams will lead to activity in workstream three which involves sharing effective practice across disciplines and institutions. Crucially, none of these workstreams assumes a “one size fits all” approach but rather will operate through collaboration with different research communities (across institutions) and through an understanding that the definition of “research openness and transparency” will mean different things in the context of different disciplines and different research methods.

One of the greatest challenges associated with re-configuring how research is carried out and reported is in terms of the incentive structures that – at an individual level – often does little to encourage the adoption of transparent research practices. Critically, the incentive structure that institutions face also does little to encourage behaviour change at an institutional level. While individuals can be incentivised to change their behaviour through the evaluation of their adoption of transparent and open research practices associated with the processes of hiring, probation, and promotion, institutions can also be incentivised to change their behaviours. These institutional incentives are likely to be financial, and so UKRI (in the form of REF) and the individual research councils have a clear role to play in rewarding institutions that embed research openness and transparency in their local research environments.

### Transcript

#### Keywords

research, uk, people, reproducibility, academics, institutions, group, funding, tweet, project, disciplines, replicability, recognising, network, england, manchester, institutional, marcus, UKRN, working

#### Text

My name is Andrew Stewart. I'm a senior lecturer in neuroscience and experimental psychology at the University of Manchester. I'm a fellow of the SSI and I currently act as the institutional lead for open and reproducible research at the University of Manchester. So I sort of sit in the university's, open research strategy group, sort of work on policy, etc, with our Vice President for Research. So today, I want to give a bit of an overview a bit of an introduction to the UK reproducibility network, UKRN, our to focus primarily on the big research England project that they've recently funded. Want to talk about some of the other activity that UKRN has been involved in recently. So really, I just want to tell you about the story. And like all good stories in the 21st century, it began with a tweet. So three years ago, Marcus Munafo at the University of Bristol, sent out this tweet, basically asking people in the Twittersphere, if they're interested in engaging in this network, that he was setting up of academics at all career levels, across all disciplines, who were interested in issues to deal with reproducibility, and replicability in research. And this tweet really came out in the middle of a broad set of conversations that were ongoing, not just within the UK, but globally, about, you know, a number of concerns that people were starting to have about, it's not just the way research has been conducted up to this point, but also by research, culture, reward recognition based the whole research endeavour and whether it was really stuck, it was really wasn't really working in the way that the way we thought that it should. So lots of people were applied to Marcus's initial tweet, I think, from Manchester there, but five of us got in touch with so many other people, other institutions that got in touch with Marcus as well. So clearly, there's a lot of interest in this network. And this brought together a bunch of like minded individuals, probably, you know, more early career researchers than mid or late career. And this allowed the UKRN, really to come into existence. So it's officially launched in March 2019, providing the central home for people who are interested in issues around reproducibility, and replicability. So I'm not going to get into sort of definitions in this in this in this in this talk, but we kind of have a broad idea of what these two things actually mean. And a lot of these concerns really emerged as a result of, you know, work by people like John Ioannidis, who, you know, in that classic paper from 2005, you know, said that most scientific, you know, publications are actually wrong. The world was full of failure to replicate industry was getting very frustrated by the fact that they were trying to commercialise a lot of academic research. But, you know, not only could they not commercialise that they couldn't even reproduce or replicate those original findings. So it appeared that there was a sort of fundamental bunch of issues, you know, lightly interconnected, issues that really kind of kind of question to end which research and researchers were incentivized was kind of was kind of not really, not really working. So there was three components, the UKRN, the steering group, is made up of, sort of five individuals at the moment, not just from psychology, welcome applied as neuroscientist Alex Collins works and sort of an environmental technology and Laura as sort of anthropologists, so, you know, reasonably good, you know, range of disciplines represented the student group on the advisory board, including John Climax, from industry. So it's important to think to, you know, ensure we're not always just talking to ourselves as academics, but actually making those connections with stakeholders, you know, people who are also interested in the results of, you know, what academics actually actually find. So we've got the steering group, the Advisory Board,
 
Institutions who wanted to formally join the UK, Iran or asked to create a senior academic possession, reporting to the provost research or vice president of research were never in order to kind of ensure that they had a commitment to the UK around agenda which was very much focused on changing research culture to improve, you know, reproducibility of the rigour in research. And you can see within 40 or so 20 institutions joined a good spread of institutions. across England, Scotland, and Wales have institutions are kind of, you know, obviously not there. But even more institutions are actually joining every month, in addition to the institutional leads, who've got sort of formal roles at their institutions, there's also a whole range of local grassroot network leads, moves, institutions that have an institutional lead will also have a grassroots open research working group led or coordinated rather by one of the local network leads.  This number grew very rapidly. And it's up to about 62. At the moment, and I suspect, actually, this is probably out of date already, institutions are joining with increasing sort of speed, as a result of sort of, you know, increased engagement with issues around open research, the UKRN really connects a lot of groups together. You know, the last thing UKRN wants to do is kind of do any duplication of effort reinvention of the wheel. So the open research, working groups are a core component within UKRN ReproducibiliTea Journal Club, some of you might be aware of typically run by early career researchers, the leaf, you know, programme for environmentally sustainable lab practices, octopus for Sam's Club, etc. So there's lots of initiatives that are sort of loosely connected to UKRN as with any organisation any sort of group of people, you can only sort of get so far on the basis of hoping that people will put their time in for free. So it's recognised pretty early on, we have to make sure that this is not just, you know, requiring people, you know, to engage in sort of goodwill give up their time for free. Funding, was important to make sure that it was going to be sustainable in the long term. And initially, the funding came and dribs and drabs from a variety of sources, some Research Council's chipped in, and cancer research, welcome, research, England, UKRI, JISC etceta. But it was, you know, pretty quickly decided that this wasn't long term sustainable, we didn't want to be going cap in hand. These funders are waiting, you know, nine months or so asking for funding. So, Marcus on the steering group then sort of looked into sort of more substantive funding that might be available at the UKRN, and we were directed towards the Research England Development Fund. So this is a significant part of UKRI UK research and innovation, which commits up to 27 million in annual funding, focused on supporting projects aiding development and attraction of higher education, research and knowledge exchange with commercial partners in line with both government and UKRI priorities. And this was happening at a time where there are a lot of initiatives occurring both nationally and internationally in terms of recognition of the importance of open research, UK government released an R&D roadmap, just over a year ago, highlighting the need for openness and research. You know, you know, skills training, digital
 
skills training, it's not just HGV drivers UK is currently shorter for people who've got sort of digital skills that sort of play a critical role and research teams. Again, the same sort of language which was highlighted in the most recent r&d people and culture strategy, really saying, you know, this needs to be this, this is needed to kind of upskill the research workforce within the UK, we need to provide these these skills and support. Internationally, as I'm sure you're aware of the number of G7 position statements released in Caole was centrally involved in this kind of work. So there was the original open science working groups position, the most recent Declaration on COVID-19, which covers openness and transparency, the research compact, and then the recent UNESCO consensus recommendations. So in that context, we developed a project to be submitted to Research England growing and embedding research culture, open research, and as usual, practice and culture. Three work streams, first of all, very much focused on providing that kind of training environment to give your researchers the kind of skills they needed to engage in open research. This is going to involve a lot of engaging with communities we kind of want to reach those bits of the academic landscape that currently aren't really, you know, to, to engage with this kind of stuff. Really trying to understand what research transparency means across disciplines. The last thing the UKRN wants to do it to come in and tell anybody how they should be doing restriction in a transparent manner. This is very much about working with communities to understand what research transparency means to them. I think engaging early career researchers is key. And then we've got work streams on evaluating how successful the training has been, and sharing best practice and borrowing a phrase from Simon Hetrick on the SSI or could be a phrase from Neil projects based on a model of collaboration, not competition. So they're about 20  partners. We started with the tweets. It's nice then that the funding was announced by tweet effectively. The project is worth £8.5 million over five years, and Research England have given us 4.5 million and it was a bit of a sort of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire type interaction, the interview that Mark Marcus was up where originally we asked for 4 million researching and came back and say we'll give you 4 million, we want to give you more than that. So they contributed an additional half million to the project, which I think works cited about 17 or 18%. of their annual research and development fund pot, which I think tells you something. The funds will support overheads and institutional leads across the 18 institutions for five years, a number of posts 18 posts, costed at grade 4 level which institutions are basically combining with other parts of funding to make sort of more substantial post higher grades with those funded by the projects. Some will sit in the library symbols and some will sit in Computer Science, some with Research IT, I'm aware I'm kind of getting a bit short on time here. So I'm going to skip on to something else we've just been recently working on. Those in the UK might have heard that the Science and Technology Committee in the UK Government recently launched an inquiry on reproducibility and research integrity and asked for submissions to that inquiry, I was responsible for drafting both the UKRN and the University of Manchester responses to the inquiry. And in both cases we say this isn't the question of reproducibility or replicability per se, this is actually about transparency in research. And that's something that sort of springs broadly across all disciplines, not just STEM disciplines. Very much recognising that the way in which people are incentivized has to change, recognising the team science approach the credibly important rule of data stewards, research software engineers as part of research team, encouraging a joined up approach across stakeholders. And one thing the UK is brilliant, that is having endless meetings and endless consultations. And we made the point very clearly that we wanted to stop this sort of endless cycle of consultations and actually get the UK government committed to action in this sort of area. Just going to skip through the next couple of slides, you can access them from the slide deck, which I'll send to Shoaib after this talk. You know, and this is going to come out actually, hopefully in BMC research notes as a way of kind of, kind of making it clear what the UKRN stands for inquire.
 
We think that it's not just about reproducibility per se, but it's actually about the broader world in which researchers conducted the incentivisations that are offered by academics. Not surprisingly, people behave in a way that's optimal for the environment and the work. So if incentivized to behave in a certain way they will, let's change the analysis and we'll change the behaviour. If you're interested in getting involved. If you're another country, if you might, well already have a reproducibility network based on you care and model. absolutely recommend that you contact networks in your own country. If your country doesn't have a reproducibility network, why not why not start one? There's lots of UKRN support for helping with that. Finally, you can sign up to the UKRN email list. You can contact me via email or Twitter. Thanks very much



