# Changing our ways: Making Inclusion a Core Feature
**by Emma Irwin**  

## From session 3 - [Human factors and new development in preserving and sustaining research software](/wosss21/agenda#session-3)  

### Resources
A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=06CxqqvhYu0&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=16) is available.

### Summary

As we look to technology to solve some of the world's biggest challenges it's critically important that we understand how the history of racism, sexism, ableism, casteism and other biases has shaped the technology we use today; that while the small steps being made to increase diversity, to address hate and harm online are encouraging, the true potential lies in our ability to move from 'having good intentions' to systematically evaluating, evolving and changing how we build software.

Open source software, which is less diverse than tech overall (despite the notion of openness) sadly, has as many stories of toxicity, exclusion and harm as it does innovative success stories. There is plenty of research, and storytelling that tells us why. We even have a set of metrics being developed both by a cross-community effort called CHAOSS and work by the U.N's to define a framework for digital inclusion. What's still lacking is a way to apply this knowledge and associated actions into our everyday engineering and community practices.

In this talk, I'll share some of my research, the CHAOSS project metrics and early work to embed metrics for inclusion into the everyday with the hope to inspire new ideas to ensure that the solutions we're building for the world, reflect the challenges and potential of everyone in it.

### Transcript

#### keywords
inclusion, open source, project, inclusive, metrics, building, open source project, diversity, work, microsoft, community, share, releasing, software, thought, people, repositories, equity, conduct, equity inclusion

#### text

So thanks so much for having me here today. I'm as much looking forward to the conversations after this as I am in the opportunity to speak with you today, right right up. So the title of my talk is making inclusion a core feature because of course, software and people are not something you can decouple people build software and how well we're enabled from a diverse perspective is essential and a core feature. So, my name is Emma Irwin, I work on Microsoft's open source programmes office or OSPO, which is an increasingly something that you'll hear in, in technology companies in institutions and government agencies. More and more OSPO are starting to pop up as people realise that having that centralised approach to open source is really beneficial. I live on Vancouver Island and beautiful British Columbia, on the unceded territory of the souk First Nation. And just so you know where I'm going with all of this, um, I am going to introduce you a little bit to diversity, equity, inclusion and open source, at least how I've thought about it, some of the research that I've done and how it all fits in, hopefully, with what you're doing, I'm still learning about a lot of your work, I'm going to introduce you to something called the chaos project, which is an open source collaboration of projects, working on metrics around inclusion, but also a lot more in open source, I'm going to walk you through some of those metrics, and maybe give you some of the backgrounds about how they came to be and how At Microsoft, we are enacting those. And then the notion of inclusion bugs. So looking for using these types of metrics to report and fix bugs around the inclusion of people. So I give a lot of workshops at Microsoft to you know, help people ground themselves and in what we mean around diversity, equity inclusion, it can be kind of become sometimes something people say, but don't really think about the meaning behind it. And I love this particular quote, around diversity is a number right, you can have people in your community or building with you, but they might not be having a very nice time. So counting them often isn't necessarily a fair thing. But inclusion is how we make them feel welcome how we make people feel included. It's also something that we need to be intentional about. So an equity is the outcome. Right? That's this is what we're after. And this is what a lot of the metrics in the work that I'll talk about is directly focused on. I think it's a good question to ask ourselves, if you're, whether you're built an open source, or whether you've released an open source project yet or not, or you've thought about building open source communities? It's a good question to start with, you know, why? Why Why take your code or your project and put it in a public repository for others to collaborate on. And I always I also like to help people think about what the wrong answers are to this question like, you might think you have some good answers. And so some of the wrong answers that I see in my time at Microsoft, but I also worked at Mozilla before this, and I worked have worked in universities, Royal Roads University, here on Vancouver Island as well. And the wrong answer can be to, you know, for kind of that free labour for help, because I can't do everything I need to do. And while that's true that that the outcome of releasing an open project might bring others in the you know, you it's an investment releasing an open source project is actually investment in the beginning. It's not to it's also not to make code available for download, you can certainly do that. But when you're releasing an open source project with a licence, and then it means a lot, it's a lot more than a download. And, and so why we do release open source projects and communities is because we have goals for external collaboration, right, like, and we should always have goals for external collaboration. So whether that, you know, we want to have user adoption of software that we're building want to have people test things, we want to bring others in with ideas, we should always be thinking about how we're enabling people to be successful in those projects. So this is another kind of grounding question. I'd like people to think about before they dive into open source by default.
 
And I'll just say, as I talked about diversity, equity inclusion, like this is kind of like a 2.0 version of diversity. I'm not going to try and convince anyone that diversity matters for innovation, or for open source projects that's well documented, nor am I going to get into the stories of why open source is actually less diverse than tech overall. So when one more recent number is using women as the canary in the coal mine is there's 4% of women in open source technology Well, compared with, like 20% in technology overall. So even though that 20% isn't great, it's been even worse in open source. And there's lots and lots of storytelling. People have been sharing their experiences for, you know, a decade or more, which, you know, we're definitely should be grateful that people have shared their stories and challenged us to do better. So I encourage you, if you haven't read any of these stories, they're readily available on the internet. So this is like 2.0 version. And there's a speaker and an educator. I don't know if you've heard of Kim Creighton, but she runs an educational, anti racist education series. And there's this great quote that she uses all the time that intention without strategy is chaos, because I think when you look at the history of open source, a lot of us meant well, right. Our intentions were good. Even the history of meritocracy, which has this idea of everyone starts in the same place, you know, came with an intention that, you know, we would welcome everyone in but, but without strategy that's just not in practice how it works, and nor is open equal to inclusion. And historically, we've thought, well, it's open, anyone can come, anyone can participate. But without specific guardrails and this inclusive strategy, it's just not being the case. So I like to emphasise that. And finally, before I kind of get into some of the metrics, you know, I want to be clear that when I talk about inclusion and open source and enabling the success of people building software, I don't just mean, the communities that we built an invite to build with us. So this is a picture from my time at Mozilla. I was part of the community even before I started working at Mozilla. And in this picture, there's a number of community members, contributors to the Mozilla project. There's also staff members, interns and former staff members. So there's no like tidy line between, you know, people who are paid to work on open source people who come to contribute and learn.  Okay, thank you. And so it's really important to, to think holistically about that. One of the projects that I work on I brought my research to is the chaos project, I'll share some of these links later, is getting intentional about systematically changing strategically changing how we think about metrics in open source. So there's a number of different working groups. One is diversity and inclusion. And there's, I think it's seven different focus areas. Each has a set of metrics associated with it, which I'll quickly walk through. The first is governance. So we, and I'll just say that this comes from research from my research from a number of other organisations and people have come together to kind of build on each other's work. This is not just one statement, but a collaborative. So things like diversity of boards, Code of Conduct enforcement, and who wants decision making. This comes from research that specifically I did learning that there's lack of strategy to address toxic behaviour. And that was often because we had code of conduct in our repositories, but didn't really do anything to enforce them. So at Microsoft, we have our code of conduct, we enforce it, we have something like a first a triage process to make sure that people understand what to do, how they're supported in the organisation. So they're never on their own. We also have a course that all paid staff are asked to take. So they understand their role in building inclusive communities, we also provide a course, at least at Mozilla, we're working on this still at Microsoft, to make sure that all of our community members also understand the same basics. We've released a project called Minimal Viable governance, which helps for inclusion decision making. And I can also share link with this a bit later. There's a number of metrics around communication and inclusivity, which you can kind of see here things like technical jargon, the technical jargon, being inclusive of non native English speakers.
 
I won't read this to you. But there's a lot of different ways that we encourage people to be inclusive around communication in their projects, things that using people's pronouns, timezone friendly. Event inclusion, open source, lots of people come together at events like this one to talk about the software that we're building was actually a badging project that this event or any in person event can go and have your event actually measured to see is your event inclusive. And this is another link that I'll give you afterwards. And you can put a badge on your page to show yeah, I guess this event has taken inclusiveness of its participants seriously. It's validated by this project of peers. So it's not just an automatic thing. There's peers who review it. So this is really great, inclusive leadership. Historically, open source has been a gatekeeping community for a number of reasons. So we have something called inclusive a checklist for inclusive metrics, which take all those attributes that we know make leadership and open source projects inclusive, you can walk through that. I have a blog post, which I can share and how to apply those. Basically, you embed those in your leadership goals, you don't create them separately, diversity can't be an afterthought. It's often like quality assurance or testing, it's something people try and do in the end. But that's not the way it works. And then of course, as I mentioned, this applies to inclusive to internal communities as well. So I'm almost done here. I'm not sure if my time is a little bit faster than I thought, um, Project community places. A minute. Yeah. Okay. So project community places are another, you know, big subject, but you know, you can dig into this. So the thing that I'm trying to put on your radar here is, if you want to dig into any of these metrics, you can, we are trying to establish the idea that reporting is not an inclusion bug in software is something anyone can do. I have a checklist which I can share with you, you can go to any project, you know, credit safe, you know, like, part of it isn't that people are angry, who run that project, and report those, I have a label on one of my repositories. You know, for example, if you have a GitHub repository, where the branch is still named master, that's a great inclusion bug to open today on your GitHub project to get the maintainers to pay attention to that it also starts to set a tone that matters to your community. And of course, recognition. So there's lots of different metrics around that. And just finally, prioritising self care, anyone that works on the inclusion of others is, you know, that empathetic the role of empathy in the community is hard and taking care of yourself. Taking care of others who are doing this work is really, really, really, really important. I can't say enough about that. And then this all comes back to what I was saying that no, equity is the outcome we're after. for it. For it to be successful. We really need to think about metrics for inclusion and just start, right just start it. I just give you a lot of information, but it's just a matter of getting started and just leaving our projects in more ethical place that we found them. I think that's a great call to action. Hopefully you agree too.

