# The FLOSS Competence Center as an Enabler of High-Quality Open Research Software in Brazil
**by Kelly Rosa Braghetto**  

## From session 3 - [Human factors and new development in preserving and sustaining research software](/wosss21/agenda#session-3)  

### Resources

A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TuDDhiuEnX0&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=20) and [slides](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1R5-Hw_n0_q2eJiOXQwFkDkacHGpwwNxC/view) are available.

### Summary

The [Free/Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS) Competence Center](https://ccsl.ime.usp.br/) of the University of São Paulo ([USP](https://www5.usp.br/)), Brazil, encompasses activities related to undergraduate and graduate education, research, development, and publicizing of free and open-source software. It is comprised of formally established centers at the Institute of Mathematics and Statistics in the city of São Paulo and at the Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science in the city of São Carlos, both at São Paulo state. The center’s primary goal is to foster the development, research, and adoption of FLOSS both inside and outside the university, by providing for users and developers high-quality resources and expertise on the various topics related to open-source software.

Since its creation in 2008, the center has been performing a fundamental role in supporting the Brazilian scientific community to embrace openness. The center offers training, consulting, and hosting to researchers from any field of science, to support the production of high-quality open research software. It provides assistance to researchers not only on tools, platforms, and licenses but also on methodologies, studies, and best practices in software development. The FLOSS Competence Center team groups some of the main researchers on Software Engineering and FLOSS of the country.

Despite its importance and high impact, the FLOSS Competence Center’s scope of action is too small, considering Brazil’s large extension and inequalities. There is a lack of country-wide open science practical initiatives and incentives of funding agencies and research institutions, which should provide physical infrastructure, information, and human resources to assist researchers.

Brazil started formal initiatives to adopt open government data in 2011 by creating the Law on Access to Information and co-founding the Open Government Partnership (OGP), which now has 77 other signatory countries. The biennial Open Government National Action Plans have raised awareness and commitments to open science. But it is worth mentioning that Brazil became a leader of the open access movement much before that. The Scientific Electronic Library Online ([SciELO](https://www.scielo.br/)), recognized as one of the most important open-access programs in the world, was established in 1997. SciELO’s publication model has been adopted by 15 other countries, in a network that contains 1200 open access journals, which publish an average of 50 thousand papers per year.

Concerning the management of open research data, coordinated actions started to take shape only more recently. In 2018, the Brazilian Ministry of Science, Technology, Innovation and Communication (MCTIC) created a Working Group to draft the National Policy for Open Science, to give the guidelines for the national policy for research data management in Brazil. At the end of the same year, Brazil adhered to the GO FAIR initiative through the creation of the GO FAIR Brazil Office, hosted by the Brazilian Institute of Information in Science and Technology, a research branch of the MCTIC. It is one of the first GO FAIR national offices established outside Europe. The first active implementation network in operation in Brazil is in the health domains; other fields are in the process of adherence negotiation. 

A few distributed efforts stand out while the national policy is not implemented, mainly on the biggest public research institutions (such as USP) and wealthiest state funding agencies (such as FAPESP). The State of São Paulo Research Foundation ([FAPESP](https://fapesp.br/)) is one of Brazil’s main funding agencies for scientific and technological research. FAPESP has been defining policies and fostering initiatives towards open science aligned with what other countries practice, aiming to increase the dissemination and the scientific, social, and economic impact of the Brazilian research it funds.

Since 2017, FAPESP requires from researchers Data Management Plans upon submission of project proposals. The data produced in projects funded by FAPESP must be stored in institutional repositories, preserving them and making them openly accessible (subject to the applicable standards and constraints).

Also in 2017, FAPESP started a workforce to develop a state network of open research data repositories, formed by the São Paulo state’s six public universities (including USP), the Aeronautics Institute of Technology (ITA), and the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (EMBRAPA). The repository that gathers research data metadata from the network institutions was [launched in 2019](https://metabuscador.uspdigital.usp.br/). The network’s infrastructure is also being used to share pseudonymized data of Covid-19 patients (~800K) from collaborating health institutions, contributing to essential researches on several countries.

In 2019, FAPESP formalized its open access policy for publications, under which all journal papers that result from FAPESP-funded research must be made publicly available in institutional open access repositories (as long as this does not violate copyright rules).

Some funding lines at FAPESP already require that all software developed within a funded project be licensed as free software. However, differently from the case of research data, there are no institutional supporting resources (such as guidelines and metadata repositories) to help researchers appropriately develop, preserve, and disseminate their research software. Until now, the sustainability of research software seems to be out of the official working groups’ radar.

This scenario highlights the importance of reinforcing and replicating the work that the FLOSS Competence Center is doing. Moreover, it exposes the urgent need for the Brazilian government, research institutions, and funding agencies to finance and cooperate to build appropriate infrastructure and establish models, skills, and policies to sustain the Brazilian research software, along with the ongoing initiatives on research data.

### Transcript

#### Keywords

research, brazil, centre, researchers, open, san paolo, brazilian, open source software, university, software, floss, research institutions, science, repositories, funding agencies, open government partnership, policy, initiatives, contributes, students

#### Text

Hi, my name is Kelly Rosa Braghetto I am an assistant professor at the Department of Computer Science of the Institute of mathematics and statistics of almost the University of San Paolo. In this short talk, I'd like to present to you the free libre open source software Competence Centre of USP, and show how the centre has been contributing to the development of high quality open research software USP was the largest public university in Brazil in the 80s. The most prestigious also, the floss Competence Centre at USP comprises activities related to educational research, development and dissemination of a free and open source software. The center's primary goal is to foster development, research and adoption of floss both inside and outside the university by providing for users and developers high quality resources and expertise on the various topics related to open source software. The university has floss centres in two campuses in San Paolo city and San Carlos city. The floss Competence Centre at San Paolo was founded in 2008. It was initially funded by the University of San Paolo, the Brazilian innovation agency, which is a state company under the Minister of Science, Technology, and innovations in the colleagues project of the European Commission under the sixth Framework Programme. The centre is building has auditory computer labs is that the rooms and professor offices it's located near the Department of Computer Science in the Centre offers physical and human resources to support curricular and extracurricular activities for the university students, mainly on topics related to open source software, open hardware, technological innovation, and entrepreneurship. The centre organises and hosts events such as lectures, workshops, conferences, hackathons and outreach courses. It's an excellent means for the university to communicate with the Brazilian society and software industry. It contributes not only in sharing the knowledge acquired by our research groups, but also working as a meeting point for students, researchers and practitioners from our region and abroad. The professors and students associated with the centre have a strong background in research on floss in software engineering. Their contributions ranged from students about the flocs X ecosystem to the improvement of open source software development models. Since its creation, the centre has been performing a fundamental role in supporting the Brazilian scientific community to embrace openness. The Centre offers training consulting in hosting to researchers from any field of science to promote the production of high quality obeying research software. It provides assistance to researches not only on tools, platforms and licences, but also on methodologies, studies and best practices in software development. Despite its importance and high impact, the centre's scope perfection is too small. Considering Brazil's large extension in inequalities, there is a lack of county wide open sciency practical initiatives. There's also a lack of missing chips from funding agencies and research institutions, which should provide physical infrastructure, information and human resources just these two researchers. At the federal level, we can see that the first movement towerd open science appeared in 2011. When Brazil started formal initiatives to adopt open government data by creating the law on access to information and co-funding the Open Government Partnership, which now has seven other signatory countries. The BA new Open Government national action plans, which are part of the Open Government Partnership have raised awareness and commitments to open science since most of the research in Brazil is developed in public institutions. But it's worth mentioning that Brazil became a leader of the open access movement much before that.
 
Brazil has an open access programme recognise it as one of the most important in the world. The Scientific Electronic Library Online SciELO, which was established in 1997. SciELO publication model has been adopted by 15 other countries in a network that groups more than 1000 Open Access journals, which publish an average of 50,000 papers per year. Concerning the management of open research data, coordinated action started to take shape only more recently, in 2018, the Brazilian Ministry of Science, Technology and innovations created a working group that to draft the national policy for open science that produces guidelines for research data management in Brazil. In the same year, Brazil adhered to the goFAIR initiative by creating the goFAIR Brazil office, hosted by the Brazilian Institute of Information in science and technology, which is a research branch of the ministry. The goal for Brazil is one of the first goFAIR national offices established outside Europe. The first activity implementation network in operation in Brazil is in the health domains. Other fields are in the process of adherence and negotiation. Why organisational policy is not implemented a few distributed efforts standout mainly on the biggest public research institutions and on the welfare state funding agencies. The state of Sao Paolo Research Foundation FAPESP is one of the main funding agencies for scientific and technological research in Brazil. FAPESP has been defining policies and fostering initiatives towards open science, align it with what is practiced in other countries in 2019, FAPESP formalised it it's open access policy for publications on the rich all journal paper that result from FAPESP before the research must be made publicly available in institutional open access repositories. As long as this does not violate corporate rules. Since 2017 FAPESP requires from researchers data management plans on the submission of project proposals, the data products, projects funded by FAPESP must be stored in institutional repositories, which should preserve them and making them openly accessible, subjected to the applicable standards and constraints. Early in 2017, FAPESP started a workforce to develop a state network of open research data repositories formatted by the six public universities of the state of Sao Paulo, including USP and the other two public institutions of research. The repository that gathers research data meta data from the network was launched in 2019. The network infrastructure is also being used to share pseudonymised data of COVID-19 patients on an initiative that contributes to essential research on several countries. For some of its funding lines FAPESP, already requires that all software development within a funded project be licensed as free software, however, differently from the case of research data, there are no institution supporting resources, such as guideline and metadata repositories to help the researchers appropriately develop, preserve and disseminate their research software. Until now, this sustainability of research software seems not to be part of the discussions of the official working groups. The scenario highlights the importance of enforcing and replicating the work that the floss Competence Centre is doing it USP. Moreover, it exposes the urgent need for the Brazilian government, the research institutions and the funding agencies to finance and cooperate to build appropriate infrastructure and establishing models and policies to sustain the Brazilian research software.

