# Research Software Sustainability in the EOSC
**by Konstantinos Repanas and Ignacio Blanquer**  

## From session 4 - [Sustaining the community and promoting (human) infrastructures for software sustainability](/wosss21/agenda#session-4)  

The definitive write-up of this talk appears in the [WoSSS21 report](https://wosss.org/#reports).

### Resources

A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iEEfKaEjpgs&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=26) is available.

### Transcript

#### Keywords

software, research, next slide, association, document, working, task force, objective, implement, sustainability, creation, recommendations, services, infrastructure, define, data, key, ignacio, foster, guidance

#### Text

Only two slides from the side of the European Commission, we would like to indeed make the distinction in Horizon Europe, this is quite different from Horizon 2020, the previous funding Framework Programme, to pay much more attention for our beneficiaries to other research outputs apart from data. And software, of course, is included there, as well as algorithms, workflows, and others. And we want indeed, these outputs to be described in the data management plan. And, wherever possible, there's a strong recommendation to upload such digital objects in the repository and provide open access, of course, when it is possible. Indeed, this follows the ambition, that software becomes a first-class research output alongside data and publications. And we provide some limited guidance in our different documents such as the annotated grant agreement and the guidance documents you can find online. And this is also a call for the community that we are open to suggestions and recommendations, we hope to significantly improve this kind of guidance, especially about software, as things developed, like for example, I will mention, and it was already mentioned the RDA Working Group FAIR for Research Software. But before I go to that, just mention of our funding topics. For example, the INFRA EOSC, the European Open Science, cloud related topics, for 2021 and 2022. To include some targeted activities, let's call them sets as the development of services and tools to archive reference, describe, and cite research software. So, this is part of a larger call, but it's a very targeted activity, or, for example, supporting global standards and specifications for research, data, publications, but also for software. So, if we go to the next one, just another mention of some activities, that the commission is sort of involved or following such as the Research Data Alliance working group that I mentioned. And we hope to see this document being in a stable form that we will very happily include it in our guidance. Also, Research Software Alliance. Michelle mentioned, of course, we would like to see also recommendations, for example, for software citation and software, archival coming out that are clear, and the EOSC executive board architecture Working Group, which now has been over, but Ignacio will talk a bit about their work. And we have a new task force and the EOSC is now under the EOSC Association. And it's called Infrastructures for Quality Research Software. And several issues of sustainability as Ignacio will give more details are included in this taskforce. So, I will hand over to Ignacio for continuing representation. Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Kostas and thank you very much organisers for this opportunity. So please next slide. So, the slide seminar quite populated, there are a lot of information. So, I will concentrate on the key points just for the sake of time, but I think that you will have all this, I mean, later for your information. So next slide, please. So, the idea I mean, I know that I believe that most of you already know about the EOSC so the EOSC European Open Science Cloud initiative has the aim of providing European researchers and researchers in general a virtual environment for open access to services to store surfaces, and reduced data and other research assets like software. So, it has been importantly funded as Kostas was mentioning in the previous H2020, former premier programme, and it's also very well addressed in the destination to have the research infrastructure. So, the European Open Science Cloud is a sum of different alliances, not only infrastructure is not only data on FAIR principles for data, but also its services acts as an interface and governance and rules for participation in global approach. So next slide. So yes, to try to I mean have a very brief calendar of important milestones that have happened in the duration of this or the development of the EOSC. So, it started on October 2016 with the creation of the high level expert group on realising the European Open Science Cloud, there was a EOSC declaration October 2017. And all the projects are few players who started on 2018. Keep, I mean, other key events that happen is the launch of the European Open Science Club in November 2018. And the creation of the association in which the Directors and the President were nominated in the first general assembly in December last year. In this month, we also have set up an important milestone, which is the creation of the dashboards that we'll talk later on. So please, next slide. So very briefly. Yeah, I mean, they there was just to show that there was a lot of effort on the creation of the EOSC, there was just this slide, try to summarise all the projects that have been addressed and specifically, you'll see during the H2020, most of them are still almost half of them are still working, I will say they're the last the right side of the of the of the slide that even those that are in the course three and seven have been recently started that are mean now getting full year. So next slide. Right, so one of the key things that was developed during the H2020 activities has been the working groups of the EOSC executed for this were six working groups that were addressing several key aspects in the implementation of EOSC, like the creation of a landscape. Like the definition of the FAIR principles, the definition and proposal architecture, rules of participation, skills, trend, and sustainability. All these six working groups have some relation with software sustainability. Some of them are more focused, like in the case of the architecture that produces the scholarly infrastructure for research software, document, all the skill and training that have the definition of the research software engineer role in EOSC. But all the others include some sections that address the FAIR principles for software, the initiative from the EOSC for software, or the recommendations for sustainability. 

So next slide. So, we'll concentrate as that will skip this one is the architecture for the sake of time. This next slide, yeah. So, we've concentrated into working groups that were finished and produced very interesting assets that I believe that are relevant for the community. Indeed, I put a lot of information here. So let me concentrate so the executive working group, executive board Working Group on architecture produce one document that was that is called a scholarly infrastructure for research software that you can find in this URL. So, this report states that the main challenges for the research software we're covering the long-term archiving, archiving, global referencing interoperability crediting of authors, as well as define which are the technical means and the technical approaches for getting these challenges addressed, as well as needs important in funding and other policy statements. So, the report finished with six concrete recommendations to strengthen direction to adopt standards in software to generalise the use of identifiers ensures visitation and foster standardisation to ease the adoption of for the whole process, you can see this document that is published officially by the European Commission. So, next slide. The other interesting group, I mean, the other group that has a special interest on the part of the software was the Executive Board on skills and training in which I participate also Michelle participate. So, in this working group, the objective was to work the competencies and capabilities needed to implement the EOSC and there was we agreed on the having the figure of the research software engineer as a key person, on the building of the EOSC and defining which were the skills which were the capabilities and the expertise that this person will have as well as the roles that we expect to be implemented by this role. So, you can see the report in this URL and get more details and the view of this working group. So next slide. So then, the association was created. So, the Association had the objective of have a single voice for representing them though the EOSC and stakeholder community and promote the alignment the European Union research policy and priorities. So then, the EOSC is association is not an instrument for implementing, technically they use but for coordinated all the effort that we are doing around collecting the metrics and guiding in this process, so the association is created at a nice meal. And by now comprises more than 200 members and observers that data organisation coming from research performance service providing or research funding organisations. So next slide. The coverage of the association members and partners is quite widespread. So, you see the members that that belong to European Union member states or associated countries and observers that can come from all over the world or from other associations. Okay, so next slide. So, one of the, I mean, the role that the association has also with software sustainability is important, the EOSC Association explicitly considered somewhere along with the rest of the research items as key assets. And we'll apply the same principles that are being applied to documents to data, for software to convince scientists to enrich publications and to federate infrastructure to provide this by enabling definition of standards and the development of tools or services through all the ecosystems of projects being addressed by the stakeholders. So next slide. So, one key document, sorry for the title and the conversion between formats. So, one of the key elements were key documents of the EOSC. In general, I would say one of the guiding documents of the EOSC association is the Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda, in which you also have the link on the slides, and I will put the link also in the in the documents. So, it's a key document that defines the long term or the medium-term implementation guidance and path for the EOSC in general. So, and I just bring up that the priority number one is to develop the next generation open science and data professionals right so developing the next generation of data and software professionals, and the activities that they pursue that are listed there. So next slide, just to pop up the key on several objectives from the SRIA a document that I invite you to read that addressing specifically software sustainability and research software. So, I will go to the specific objective number five, that addresses the creation of the interoperability framework to support software at the same level as the other research artefacts and the operational objectives and, perhaps operational objective number seven aims of co-developing a first generation of a robust Pan European network infrastructure for service source code with incentives and documentation for creating that. The aim is that we will have to set up this by 2025. Next slide.

So, one of the key instruments the association puts in place to implement all these in the EOSC is task forces. Task forces are groups that are created by members and externals from the association that have a relation with the EOSC. In general, to address some of the principles, I want to address that one specific task force that is devoted to infrastructure for quality research software. I'm the liaison person from all the task forces related with technical challenges on EOSC. So, in the next slide, which is almost the last one, please next slide. I try to summarise the objectives and the specific actions that are being implemented by this task force, this task force has just started. So, there is no kickoff agenda. So, all the members have been selected during September and all the process that we are carrying out, you can find the charter there I also put the direct link on the notes of the conference. And the objective of the task force is to foster the development and deployment on to services for archiving referencing and describing and research software. Another very important point. So, you must take into account that we had the word quality on the title is to improve the quality of research software from a technical organisational point of view, giving guidance and giving also trying to standardise means for verification and means for recognising the quality of their software, and of course to increase the recognition of software development. So, there are two specific subgroups one that is devoted to sustainability that are building first a landscape and gap analysis and in defining blockers and limitations and best practice for creating the recommendations. Another specific subgroup on quality software services will try to define quality criteria for a software quality baselines and services to implement that. So next slide as a conclusion, so the EOSC Association are fostering sustained development of open science reaching publications, data software, according to the FAIR principles in focusing, or making them usable, by machines, made by computers and scientists using federated infrastructure to foster their reuse of software, as well as the other assets in the future. So EOSC considers software a first-class object, along with the other and a key element for reproducibility. It's clearly stated on this SRIA, that software is a key element to guarantee the reproducibility of science, and it has created the task force to focus exactly on this specific point. And that's all from my side.



