# The fundamental part of software: the human infrastructure
**by Martin Hammitzsch on behalf of the EuSSI consortium**  

## From session 4 - [Sustaining the community and promoting (human) infrastructures for software sustainability](/wosss21/agenda#session-4)  

### Resources

A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O4ZUJOi3GMY&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=24) is available.

### Summary

Infrastructures are facilities, services, and installations needed for the functioning of communities. Whereas facilities and installations can be an array of equipment set up for use, facilities are also abilities and aptitudes to perform activities and to serve particular functions. In this regard, services are assistance and help, they are abilities set up as work and duties done for others. Following these definitions we take a look at different aspects of the fundamental part of research software – the human infrastructure – and what it takes to ensure its sustainability and thus software sustainability.

The human infrastructure of research software involves communities, on the one hand, those having a demand for software, and on the other hand, those meeting these needs. Ensuring measures that support both of them necessitates: firstly, common policies, guidelines and procedures that community members can follow; secondly, awareness, training and exchange that enable community members to learn and engage; thirdly, work capacities that community members can make use of; and, finally, funding that allows members of the communities to take advantage of support measures as well as to provide these support measures.

The measures comprise community building and the sustaining of these communities. They are manifold and, among others, e.g., involve the elaboration and adoption of best practices with policies, the passing on of knowledge and skills with training, the initiation and promotion of collaborations and exchange, across national and regional funding borders, with hacky hours and fellowship programs, the giving of advice with consulting, and the implementation of software with research software engineering.

In some places these measures are implemented in a structured manner and with success, in other places they depend on the voluntary commitment of individuals and groups. Sharing resources across wider geographical areas with a coordinated and structured approach would, however, be advantageous in Europe across the board. The cooperation between those involved regionally and locally has already established itself nationally and internationally at the working level. But the collaboration between European countries in a structured approach seems like the next logical step to address the shared needs with a coordinated and efficient use of resources.

We will take a look at some of these aspects from a human infrastructure and community perspective that is expecting trusted, reliable and supported infrastructures containing multi-purpose and tailor-made software for their research work. Finally, we aim to address unsolved issues in understanding research software as (human) infrastructure and in managing, implementing, operating, maintaining and developing it as such.

### Transcript

#### Keywords

software, infrastructures, research, organising, standards, community, scientists, support, talking, important, services, network, structured approach, multidisciplinary research, ubiquity, engaged, science, enable, connect, processes

#### Text

So, first I have to say that this time I really started with blank slides and that many other people helped to shape the slides and what is in the talk. I'm also very happy to have this opportunity and look up from the daily routine tasks and think ahead of it and setting a workshop session looking at human infrastructure was excellent, and it was a great challenge to think about that. So, these are the people who contributed to the slides and also helped in informing the content of it. But there also were of course others, I think you already know the names because we are one community and many of them are known to you. And we aimed since arrival to support research software sustainability across Europe and beyond, and gave the whole thing a title which is EUSSI. So when we look at human infrastructure, we can do a first thing which is asking a dictionary and dictionaries, because what we think of first is that we all associate infrastructure with tangible real world objects. So we think of communication systems, such as the telephone network, or the internet, transportation systems like railroads, streets, or water and power lines. But when looking at a dictionary, it also says very clearly that infrastructures are the basic facilities, services and installations for the functioning of the community. And we can ask the dictionary again, for what facilities, services and a community are. And it is quite surprising that the first thing that I mention here, facility; is an ease in moving or doing something, but it's also an ability and aptitude. So, which clearly indicates that we are talking about people. When we look up what is service is, then it says, again, at the first place, that this is work that is done for others, that these could be also duties and more importantly, assistance and help, which clearly is indication that we are talking about people and talking about infrastructures. And, finally we can have a look at the community, I think it's something that we all know. So, this is a group of people having common interests, the group is viewed as forming a distinct segment, and it can be also a group of organisms interacting with one another and the environment in a specific region, where a specific region in this case is an area of interest and activity, which in our case is science. It can be a specific research domain, but it can also be the support of research, such as software services. So, what are we talking about? I think we are talking about the human aspect, which has a huge portion in infrastructures, and an infrastructure is built out of people. So, people form the infrastructure. So the human infrastructure is the people, and they are the backbone of software sustainability. Who are these people? In the first place, of course, these are scientists. So these are people, experts, which are engaged in observing, investigating describing, explaining, predicting phenomena, real world phenomena. Then we also have the RSEs, the research software engineers or people that develop code, experts which are engaged in planning, constructing, designing, producing, and operating and managing software. And finally, we have funders, which are the people who are engaged in promoting and supporting communities, and who help with organising and developing and financing undertakings, in this case in science. So this is a community with three very important stakeholders that go hand in hand.

So, what are their roles? so of course, the scientist is someone who does science and requires research software nowadays for that. This is standard. So, scientists take advantage of support measures. We have RSEs, who provide the required research software to the scientists, and provide support measures to work with the software, and to allow them to gain the skills needed to work with the software. And finally, of course, there are the funders who promote the science and sponsor the support measures. 

So, the question is what ensures software sustainability? And basically, we can say that software is made for people, software is made by people, and software is promoted to serve people. Which basically is that software and sustainability simply is all about people that have a very common objective, which is science in our case. So, the building and sustaining of software is a community effort that cannot be achieved with an array of equipment only. It's definitely the human infrastructures, the people, that are able to sustain the software and to make use of it.

So, the next thing would be; what would be the building blocks of people-centric infrastructure for research software? We can group them somehow. It could be standards, knowledge and skills. It could be community building, networking, projects and operations. I think we all know very well that these are parts of it, that are required to finally gain sustainability when we talk about research software. For standards, for example, we need some sort of policies and best practices that are established, and guidance to help others in adopting these best practices and policies. We're talking about processes that everyone is aware of, and understands and can make use of, we may talk about certification, also, sort of, career paths here. For the standards, I think there is a very good example because we all know that when we look at training, we all know The Carpentries, and just by naming The Carpentries, we have a certain understanding of what it is, what the quality level is, and what services are behind it. So, the carpentries helped to form an international standard in providing training, for example, so standards matter. For knowledge and skills, we talked about it, it's about training, a workshop, which is something that we are doing all the time, on a weekly basis more or less, but it's also much more, it’s advice, on the job training. It's also mentoring, so being together with the scientists and maybe accompanying the research itself, together with them. It also integrates hacky hours, a very important thing also is community building, the fellowship programmes, ambassador programmes, and also organising workshops and conferences, to get in touch with each other and exchange and allow people to connect with each other and to form, let's say, groups, smaller groups, specific groups in the community, for focusing on certain aspects. So of course, networking is also a very important building block, where awareness raising, communication and exchange, are important things, and also the promotion of collaboration, which is important when we look at, for example, for research activities as certain hours required when it comes to building software or making use of software. And then we have more from industry, but we know that but it's also true for research; In the project itself, we need some consulting, engineering, implementation and management services when it comes to software projects, or software related activities within research projects. And in the end, of course, operations play a crucial role as well when we are talking about deploying software, maybe as a cloud service, for example, making it available on HPC infrastructures are similar. So, the provisioning, maintenance, and also the preservation of software, when it comes to publications, for example, is sort of operations, and all these things are not things we are doing with an array of equipment, it's something where people are behind.

So, the next question would be; Why is people-centred infrastructure essential for software? For the scientists it improves research workflows with software tools that fit to the process of scientists. A scientist gains time to undertake research, so using software and getting support provides a great opportunity to spend more time on research. It increases impact to improve quality and sharing of outputs. It builds, essentially, trust with repeatable, reproducible, and reusable results. And, of course, scientists benefit from multidisciplinary research because scientists connect with Research Software Engineers. So, what is essential in terms of the Research Software Engineers? They improve the usability and reliability of the software and research data likewise, because these two things are strongly connected to each other. They facilitate reproducibility and re-use, which adds the transparency and efficiency to science. And they support establishing cross-organisation and cross-border processes that can be followed, so that many research domains can somehow follows the same processes, and we have, sort of standards that we can adopt. And the funders are those who enable the use of the resources efficiently and in a coordinated way to address the shared needs of the community. And they promote taking advantage of support measures and they also sponsor the provision of harmonised support measures, to be efficient. They of course stimulate to learn and engage to improve the impact, and of course encourage multidisciplinary research. So, importantly, we have to understand that infrastructures shape over decades, and it's important to address infrastructures in a way that they really have this impact over the decades in the sciences.

So, the question is what are the network effects? when we look at one platform, then the platform enables the connections to be made and allows somehow sufficiently large critical mass of engaged members, which means that widespread connections are possible. And this increases the scale of the network and thus increases the value to everyone on the network and makes the entire network more useful for each of the members. So, having one platform with much options to connect to each other is very important. As well as the aspect of ubiquity, ubiquity makes it an essential part of the daily life throughout Europe and internationally and allows access and making use of it almost anywhere, and everyone knows what to do. So, this is also very important to speed up research activities and have more time on research. Compatibility is another aspect when we look for example, at standards. It facilitates the development of complementary services, not necessarily by compatibility with each other, but with common standards, which then creates value in large measures, because everyone else uses it as well. So for the funders, for example, if we apply a platform, and enable a network of connections and support ubiquity use and compatibility, we get some sort of economies of scale where many on the same network are served with this service, shown drawn one of the previous slides, and at an affordable price in the end.

So, we can think of what a cross-discipline research network can look at. Importantly, from my point of view, a harmonised approach, because it enables network effects with the appropriate procedures in place. And it provides the foundation that allows for universal and reliable services by efficient infrastructures. And there's a structured approach across national and regional funding borders, could address establishing standards, ensuring integration and providing support. So, when tinkering a bit with this idea, we can ask ourselves, what could a structured approach look like? And it's important to organise the community in a certain way and maybe address this organising in three pillars, where we, for example, look at standards, the policies and the best practices where we establish processes that can be followed by many in Europe and internationally. That we also allow sort of certification and career paths with this standardisation. But also, it is in terms of adoption of the technologies and the way of their use when thinking in terms of an engineering way. And when looking at the integration, it includes passing on of skills, the training, mentoring, for example, also community building activities with fellowship programmes and Ambassador programmes, as well as networking activities that enable and enable a fast exchange and promote collaborations. And also, the third pillar is a sort of classical support, with services that help in projects and in operations, like consulting, implementation, and the provisioning and maintenance of software.

And these pillars, somehow needs to be organised and structured and need strong interfacing with the research domains in one platform, which could be done, for example, with a software panel, we have domain and software experts involved. And importantly, we need advice from the e-infrastructures. So finally, we can provide I think, answers right now. But these should be some impulses to think of and there are also further questions that need to be addressed to possibly help us with finding how we could organise the community in a more structured approach. We have to look at what scale of funding is an important thing. Also, the funding roadmap might be an important thing. So how do we achieve well thought out software funding? What would what would be the major themes for that roadmap? Should it be a European wide coordination, for example? And what are the roles of the different, let's say, organisations involved in that case? Universities are different than research centres in some roles, and also research infrastructures are a bit different and have different objectives in mind. We also have to consider different research programmes. And of course, we also have to think about if it's only the people behind and in front of the software that are the key to ensure software sustainability, or if there's anything else to be considered. Thanks

