# The People Roadmap: Mapping people-related initiatives in the research software community
**by Michelle Barker**  

## From session 4 - [Sustaining the community and promoting (human) infrastructures for software sustainability](/wosss21/agenda#session-4)  

### Resources

A [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iXhaAox4EYA&list=PLXAvKzjdTsrxFqbjWtxHjfJc0RN6jMwZg&index=23) and [slides](https://tinyurl.com/wosss-resa) are available.

### Summary

The People Roadmap is a Research Software Alliance (ReSA) consultation to map the landscape of research software community initiatives focused on people-themed issues, as part of ReSA’s mission is to bring research software communities together to collaborate on the advancement of the research software ecosystem.

28 organisations, community initiatives and/or projects in the research software community have been profiled as part of the creation of the People Roadmap, to facilitate identification and opportunities for accelerating efforts to address major issues related to personnel challenges. The People Roadmap aims to increase understanding on how to create an environment where research software personnel are recognised, have appropriate skill sets and access to inclusive communities, within policy and infrastructure environments that support their work.  

The People Roadmap was conceived in response to the evolution of a range of research and software areas, including 1) the rise of open science (which includes open software), 2) increased understanding of the need for advanced digital skills in the research community (including research software engineering) to achieve the aims of open science, and 3) the development of the Research Software Engineering movement to recognise and support the Research Software Engineers who are responsible for the development and maintenance of a significant amount of research software.

### Transcript

#### Keywords

organisations, software, collaborate, initiatives, research, themes, infrastructure, people, working, roadmap, enable, share, profiled, community, international, goals, areas, inputs, efforts, skills

#### Transcript

I am Michelle Barker, director of the Research Software Alliance (ReSA), thank you very much for this opportunity to share some information on work we've been doing called people roadmap. There's a link to my slides there. But it's also contained in the agenda in the notes section, there are pointers to give you a bit of background information about ReSA as context for the activity on the people roadmap. Our vision is that research software and those who develop and maintain it are recognised and valued as fundamental and vital to research worldwide. A vision shared by many research software communities and other organisations in the research sector and individuals, including so many people here today. And our mission is to bring those communities interested in research software together to collaborate on the advancement of the research software ecosystem. All this is contained in our recently released strategic plan if you'd like to read more details, so part of the reason why we formed was recognition that the research software community is heavily developed over many years to the stage where it's difficult now to know who's doing what with so many fantastic things are happening nationally or internationally and at in the disciplines and on specific issues, like career paths, or to create a particular infrastructure. 

We were thinking about how we could make it easier for people to find each other to understand how well the ecosystem is functioning and to be able to analyse where, as a group, we could be working a little bit better to achieve shared goals. We work across three themes, people, policy and infrastructure.

The people roadmap, is a way of framing questions to do with the people side. When we thought about how do we break down what does people need? What are the different elements of a people theme, we decided to adapt this fantastic strategy for culture change from Brian Nosek, Centre for Open Science, we have to discuss the bottom the second bottom line wording slightly to identify these as five areas that are needed in the people themed area, you could apply this, of course, to other themes as well. 

We wanted to ask some questions for the people roadmap, with the aim of identifying opportunities for accelerating efforts to achieve people related goals. We wanted to understand who was working on each of these five themes, if you like, within the people area, want to understand some things about how much they collaborate, what are some of the activities they do, who funds them, and where they see opportunities to work more together or where there's gaps or particular priorities.

To do this, we invited 28 organisations to an individual interviews, one on one to profile them. This was 28 organisations initiatives or projects that we covered. And this is really a fraction of who we could have, of course talked to. This was just a sample to get started to see if the work would yield something interesting if there was a way of structuring what we were finding out that would enable others to find the outputs useful. The organisations that are involved varied from very large international intergovernmental efforts like ELIXIR in life science and European Open Science Cloud (EOSC), through to very small discrete projects, with a very short timeframe to run such CiteAs and national efforts like NeSI in New Zealand. There are specific infrastructures, infrastructures like the German Aerospace Centre, and there are organisations that focus on particular areas like the Code Refinery, schools and training.

We asked them all the same set of questions and those questions are in the draft roadmap. But if you look, again, in the agenda, whether it's linked to my slides, or there's a link to the draft of the roadmap, which you can go away and read and comment on, give input on and sort of a list of all the questions and so we asked them of these five initiatives or themes. Do you have activities addressing all of these or goals or strategies? And these were the results. It was interesting to find that almost everyone now says they do something to contribute to incentives, and by that we mean career paths, and metrics and recognition. People, software, and most people actually said I also do something around developing community to help people and some aspects of skills and training can see they're slightly less, saying that they did something in policy and infrastructure, although it's difficult to really define, what, for example, is an infrastructure that supports people themed issues, and what isn't something like ELIXIR’s TeSS software that enables you to upload and sort of maybe it's just a registry share skills and training materials is very clearly supporting, you know, skills and training elements of the people theme. But if we look at IT infrastructure that provides access to cloud computing, which is used by people enhances that capability enables them to collaborate with others, is that also people feed infrastructure is one of the questions that we note in the document or something that needs some more thought. We used a commercial software tool called the Exaptive City Map to map all the results, because we were trying to see how well everyone collaborates, whether there are patterns, and who was working with who want particular things. So I've just got a couple of screenshots here to give you some sample of what we found. The rest the information is in the report. These are all the organisations or the initiatives that said they had a skills and training focus. And the links between them shows who collaborates with whom, although it's not necessarily the skills and training focus, it's difficult to read. So we can do more detailed analysis, such as this shows that certain organisations are very key collaborators that many other organisations interact with. So no surprise to everyone. This example is the Software Sustainability Institute, the Carpentries, and a Society of Research Software Engineering. Also, two of the other initiatives we profiled that had high integration with a lot of other work. Yes, that's to be expected, given that there have been such pivotal initiatives for a long time with an international focus, therefore, of great value to many people in the community. We're at the stage now where we've finished this pilot and written up the draft. So as I said, please go and have a look at what we discovered and how we picked it up and give us some inputs. But also do a couple of public webinars sometime in November to get some broader inputs and share the outputs with a wider stakeholder group. And then we'll keep working on this in 2022. So one of the things we want to do, obviously, is enable more inputs, with many more groups that could be profiled to continue to add to the model. And you particularly need to include some global south countries, because there's no representation from those at the moment. And that increased mapping would enable us to continue to think about where organisations could collaborate more where there's gaps when no one's working on something. Also, some information we have on who's funded by who to see some patents on that. And then we're also thinking about how we can then begin to create some communities around particular areas for taskforces to address particular goals, and who, in the research software community might like to lead those kinds of conversations. So that together, we can continue to work towards shared goals and events in recognition of research software, those who created by working together when it's applicable to do so at solving some issues at international level, maturity would be beneficial to our national discipline, specific focus. So if you'd like to keep up to that up to date with that, and subscribe to that newsletter. Finally, I just like to thank the the Wellcome Trust for their support for this project and for all the interviewees from the initiatives who contributed their time to assist the committee to run this, so thank you very much.

